<!---
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  distributed with this work for additional information
  regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

## Developer's guide

Common information for all Rust libraries in this project, including
testing, code formatting, and lints, can be found in the main Arrow
Rust [README.md](../README.md).

Please refer to [lib.rs](src/lib.rs) for an introduction to this
specific crate and its current functionality.

## IPC

The expected flatc version is 1.12.0+, built from [flatbuffers](https://github.com/google/flatbuffers)
master at fixed commit ID, by regen.sh.

The IPC flatbuffer code was generated by running this command from the root of the project:

```bash
./regen.sh
```

The above script will run the `flatc` compiler and perform some adjustments to the source code:

- Replace `type__` with `type_`
- Remove `org::apache::arrow::flatbuffers` namespace
- Add includes to each generated file

## Guidelines in usage of `unsafe`

[`unsafe`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch19-01-unsafe-rust.html) has a high maintenance cost because debugging and testing it is difficult, time consuming, often requires external tools (e.g. `valgrind`), and requires a higher-than-usual attention to details. Undefined behavior is particularly difficult to identify and test, and usage of `unsafe` is the [primary cause of undefined behavior](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/behavior-considered-undefined.html) in a program written in Rust.
For two real world examples of where `unsafe` has consumed time in the past in this project see [#8545](https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/8645) and [8829](https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/8829)
This crate only accepts the usage of `unsafe` code upon careful consideration, and strives to avoid it to the largest possible extent.

### When can `unsafe` be used?

Generally, `unsafe` should only be used when a `safe` counterpart is not available and there is no `safe` way to achieve additional performance in that area. The following is a summary of the current components of the crate that require `unsafe`:

- alloc, dealloc and realloc of buffers along cache lines
- Interpreting bytes as certain rust types, for access, representation and compute
- Foreign interfaces (C data interface)
- Inter-process communication (IPC)
- SIMD
- Performance (e.g. omit bounds checks, use of pointers to avoid bound checks)

#### cache-line aligned memory management

The arrow format recommends storing buffers aligned with cache lines, and this crate adopts this behavior.
However, Rust's global allocator does not allocate memory aligned with cache-lines. As such, many of the low-level operations related to memory management require `unsafe`.

#### Interpreting bytes

The arrow format is specified in bytes (`u8`), which can be logically represented as certain types
depending on the `DataType`.
For many operations, such as access, representation, numerical computation and string manipulation,
it is often necessary to interpret bytes as other physical types (e.g. `i32`).

Usage of `unsafe` for the purpose of interpreting bytes in their corresponding type (according to the arrow specification) is allowed. Specifically, the pointer to the byte slice must be aligned to the type that it intends to represent and the length of the slice is a multiple of the size of the target type of the transmutation.

#### FFI

The arrow format declares an ABI for zero-copy from and to libraries that implement the specification
(foreign interfaces). In Rust, receiving and sending pointers via FFI requires usage of `unsafe` due to
the impossibility of the compiler to derive the invariants (such as lifetime, null pointers, and pointer alignment) from the source code alone as they are part of the FFI contract.

#### IPC

The arrow format declares a IPC protocol, which this crate supports. IPC is equivalent to a FFI in that the rust compiler can't reason about the contract's invariants.

#### SIMD

The API provided by the [packed_simd_2](https://docs.rs/packed_simd_2/latest/packed_simd_2/) crate is currently `unsafe`. However,
SIMD offers a significant performance improvement over non-SIMD operations. A related crate in development is
[portable-simd](https://rust-lang.github.io/portable-simd/core_simd/) which has a nice
[beginners guide](https://github.com/rust-lang/portable-simd/blob/master/beginners-guide.md). These crates provide the ability
for code on x86 and ARM architectures to use some of the available parallel register operations. As an example if two arrays
of numbers are added, [1,2,3,4] + [5,6,7,8], rather than using four instructions to add each of the elements of the arrays,
one instruction can be used to all all four elements at the same time, which leads to improved time to solution. SIMD instructions
are typically most effective when data is aligned to allow a single load instruction to bring multiple consecutive data elements
to the registers, before use of a SIMD instruction.

#### Performance

Some operations are significantly faster when `unsafe` is used.

A common usage of `unsafe` is to offer an API to access the `i`th element of an array (e.g. `UInt32Array`).
This requires accessing the values buffer e.g. `array.buffers()[0]`, picking the slice
`[i * size_of<i32>(), (i + 1) * size_of<i32>()]`, and then transmuting it to `i32`. In safe Rust,
this operation requires boundary checks that are detrimental to performance.

Usage of `unsafe` for performance reasons is justified only when all other alternatives have been exhausted and the performance benefits are sufficiently large (e.g. >~10%).

### Considerations when introducing `unsafe`

Usage of `unsafe` in this crate _must_:

- not expose a public API as `safe` when there are necessary invariants for that API to be defined behavior.
- have code documentation for why `safe` is not used / possible
- have code documentation about which invariant the user needs to enforce to ensure [soundness](https://rust-lang.github.io/unsafe-code-guidelines/glossary.html#soundness-of-code--of-a-library), or which
- invariant is being preserved.
- if applicable, use `debug_assert`s to relevant invariants (e.g. bound checks)

Example of code documentation:

```rust
// JUSTIFICATION
//  Benefit
//      Describe the benefit of using unsafe. E.g.
//      "30% performance degradation if the safe counterpart is used, see bench X."
//  Soundness
//      Describe why the code remains sound (according to the definition of rust's unsafe code guidelines). E.g.
//      "We bounded check these values at initialization and the array is immutable."
let ... = unsafe { ... };
```

When adding this documentation to existing code that is not sound and cannot trivially be fixed, we should file
specific JIRA issues and reference them in these code comments. For example:

```rust
//  Soundness
//      This is not sound because .... see https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-nnnnn
```

# Releases and publishing to crates.io

Please see the [release](../dev/release/README.md) for details on how to create arrow releases
